.TH RPMDRAKE-NG 1 "February 2025" "rpmdrake-ng 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rpmdrake-ng \- graphical package manager for Mageia Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpmdrake-ng
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpmdrake-ng
is a modern Qt6 graphical interface for managing packages on Mageia Linux.
It provides an intuitive way to search, install, remove, and update packages.
.PP
rpmdrake-ng is built on top of the urpm-ng core library, providing fast
dependency resolution using libsolv and support for parallel downloads.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
.TP
.B Ctrl+F
Focus the search field.
.TP
.B Ctrl+A
Select all visible packages.
.TP
.B Escape
Deselect all packages.
.TP
.B Ctrl+I
Install selected packages.
.TP
.B Ctrl+R
Remove selected packages.
.TP
.B Ctrl+U
Update selected packages.
.TP
.B Ctrl++
Zoom in (increase font size).
.TP
.B Ctrl+-
Zoom out (decrease font size).
.TP
.B F5
Refresh package list.
.SH PACKAGE STATES
Packages in the list are displayed with visual indicators:
.TP
.B Blue (bold)
Explicitly installed package.
.TP
.B Dark blue
Installed as dependency.
.TP
.B Purple
Orphan package (no longer required).
.TP
.B Amber
Update available.
.TP
.B Red
Package conflict.
.SH FILTERS
The filter panel allows filtering packages by:
.TP
.B State
All, Installed, Not installed, Updates available, Orphans.
.TP
.B Group
Package categories (Development, System, Network, etc.).
.TP
.B Media
Package repositories.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
Package installation, removal, and updates require root privileges.
rpmdrake-ng uses PolicyKit to request authentication when needed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/urpm/
Configuration directory for urpm-ng.
.TP
.I ~/.config/rpmdrake/
User preferences (window size, zoom level).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR urpm (1),
.BR urpmd (8)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/pvi-github/urpm-ng/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Mageia Community
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Mageia Community.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later.
