.\" Man page for urpm
.TH URPM 1 "January 2025" "urpm-ng" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
urpm \- modern package manager for Mageia Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B urpm
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B urpm
is a modern package manager for Mageia Linux, providing fast dependency
resolution using libsolv, P2P package sharing between LAN machines,
and an intuitive command-line interface.
.PP
It is designed as a complete rewrite of the classic urpmi toolset.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version number and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Verbose output.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Quiet output.
.TP
.B \-\-nocolor
Disable colored output.
.TP
.B \-\-root \fIDIR\fR
Use \fIDIR\fR as root for the RPM install (chroot). The urpm
configuration is still read from the host system.
.TP
.B \-\-urpm-root \fIDIR\fR
Use \fIDIR\fR as root for both the urpm configuration and the RPM
install. Used by \fBinit\fR/\fBcleanup\fR and image bootstrapping.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
The following options are inherited (via parent parsers) by most
transactional and query commands (\fBinstall\fR, \fBupgrade\fR,
\fBerase\fR, \fBdownload\fR, \fBdepends\fR, \fBrdepends\fR,
\fBshow\fR, \fBlist\fR, \fBsearch\fR, \fBfind\fR, \fBhistory\fR,
\fBcache\fR, \fBmedia\fR, \fBserver\fR, \fBpeer\fR, \fBmirror\fR,
\fBconfig\fR ...).
.TP
.B \-\-arch \fIARCH\fR
Target architecture (default: current system). Recognized by
\fBinit\fR, \fBdownload\fR, \fBmedia autoconfig\fR, \fBimage make\fR
and the install/upgrade/erase family. Distinct from
\fB\-\-allow\-arch\fR (which whitelists \fIextra\fR architectures
alongside the system arch — typically \fBi686\fR for wine/steam on
x86_64).
.TP
.B \-\-debug \fICOMPONENT\fR
Enable debug output for one component:
\fBsolver\fR, \fBtsrun\fR, \fBorphans\fR, \fBdownload\fR, \fBtiming\fR,
or \fBall\fR. Inherited by install/upgrade/download.
.TP
.B \-\-watched \fIPACKAGES\fR
Comma-separated list of packages to watch during dependency
resolution; the solver prints every decision involving them.
.TP
.B \-\-json
JSON output (for scripting). Available on most query and list
commands.
.TP
.B \-\-flat
One item per line (script-friendly).
.TP
.B \-\-show-all ", " \-a
Show all items without truncation. On install/upgrade, also expands
the per-package skip reason in best-effort mode.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Package Installation and Removal
.TP
.B i|install \fIpackage\fR ...
Install one or more packages.
.B install
is atomic by default: any failure rolls back the whole transaction.
Pass \fB\-\-no\-atomic\fR to switch to best-effort mode. See \fBPARTIAL
TRANSACTIONS\fR below.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
No confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-test
Dry run (simulation).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-atomic
Best-effort mode: install what can be installed and list dropped
packages with their reason (exit 2 on partial). Default is atomic.
.TP
.B \-\-reinstall
Reinstall already-installed packages (repair).
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force install despite dependency problems or conflicts.
.TP
.B \-\-download\-only
Download packages without installing.
.TP
.B \-\-nodeps
Skip dependency resolution (use with \fB\-\-download\-only\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-without\-recommends
Do not install recommended packages.
.TP
.B \-\-with\-suggests
Also install suggested packages.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Install all matching families simultaneously (e.g., both php8.4 and
php8.5 if both provide the requested capability).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-peers
Disable P2P download from LAN peers.
.TP
.B \-\-only\-peers
Only download from LAN peers, no upstream mirrors.
.TP
.B \-\-noscripts
Skip pre/post install scriptlets (chroot/container builds).
.TP
.B \-\-nosignature
Skip GPG signature verification (not recommended).
.TP
.B \-\-config\-policy " " \fBkeep\fR|\fBreplace\fR|\fBask\fR
Config file conflict policy. Default \fBkeep\fR preserves existing
configs (\fI.rpmnew\fR for the package version), \fBreplace\fR uses
the package version (\fI.rpmsave\fR for the local one), \fBask\fR
prompts on each conflict.
.TP
.B \-\-install\-src
Install a source RPM: extract its \fI.spec\fR and sources into
\fI~/rpmbuild/\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-prefer " " \fIprefs\fR
Comma-separated preferences for alternatives (e.g.,
\fIphp:8.4,nginx,-apache-mod_php\fR). See \fBPREFERENCES\fR in the
README.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-buildrequires ", " \-\-builddeps ", " \-\-br " " \fI[spec]\fR
Install build dependencies from spec file or SRPM. Auto-detects if no file specified.
.TP
.B \-\-sync
Wait for all scriptlets and triggers to complete before returning.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-arch " " \fIarch\fR
Allow additional architectures beyond system arch and noarch. Can be repeated.
By default, only packages matching the system architecture (e.g., x86_64) and
noarch are considered. Use this option to install 32-bit packages on 64-bit
systems (e.g., \fB\-\-allow\-arch i686\fR for wine or steam). Distinct from
the parent \fB\-\-arch\fR option which sets the target architecture
itself.
.RE
.TP
.B e|erase \fIpackage\fR ...
Remove one or more packages. Aliases: \fBremove\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
No confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-test
Dry run (simulation).
.TP
.B \-\-auto\-orphans
Also remove orphaned dependencies (implied by
.BR \-y / \-\-auto
unless \fB\-\-keep\-orphans\fR is given).
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-orphans
Do not remove orphan dependencies left behind by the removal.
.TP
.B \-\-erase\-recommends
Also remove packages only recommended by remaining packages.
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-suggests
Keep packages suggested by remaining packages.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force removal despite dependency problems.
.TP
.B \-\-debug " " \fBsolver\fR|\fBtsrun\fR|\fBall\fR
Enable debug output for the resolver and/or transaction runner.
.TP
.B \-\-sync
Wait for all post-uninstall triggers to complete before returning.
.RE
.TP
.B autoremove
Remove orphaned packages, old kernels, failed dependencies, or build dependencies.
Alias: \fBar\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-orphans
Remove orphaned packages (default if no selector given).
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-kernels
Remove old kernels (keeps running + N recent, see \fBurpm config kernel\-keep\fR).
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-faildeps
Remove orphan dependencies from interrupted transactions.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-buildrequires ", " \-\-builddeps ", " \-\-br
Remove packages installed as build dependencies (tracked in
.IR /var/lib/rpm/installed\-through\-builddeps.list ")."
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
All of the above.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
No confirmation prompt.
.RE
.SS Metadata and Package Updates
.TP
.B update \fR[\fImedia\fR]
Update media metadata only (apt-style). Does not upgrade packages.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-files
Also sync files.xml for media with sync_files enabled.
.RE
.TP
.B u|upgrade \fR[\fIpackage\fR ...]
Upgrade packages (system upgrade if none specified).
.B upgrade
runs in best-effort mode by default since 0.7.9: see
\fBPARTIAL TRANSACTIONS\fR below.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
No confirmation prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-test
Dry run (simulation).
.TP
.B \-\-atomic
Strict mode: abort the whole transaction if any package cannot be
upgraded. Recommended on servers. Without this flag, upgrade is
best-effort and exits 2 if any package was dropped.
.TP
.B \-\-with\-recommends
Install recommended packages (not installed by default for upgrades).
.TP
.B \-\-with\-suggests
Also install suggested packages.
.TP
.B \-\-noerase\-orphans
Keep orphan dependencies (do not remove them after the upgrade).
.TP
.B \-\-download\-only
Download packages but do not apply the upgrade.
.TP
.B \-\-nosignature
Skip GPG signature verification (not recommended).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-peers
Disable P2P download from LAN peers.
.TP
.B \-\-only\-peers
Only download from LAN peers, no upstream mirrors.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force upgrade despite dependency problems or conflicts.
.TP
.B \-\-config\-policy " " \fBkeep\fR|\fBreplace\fR|\fBask\fR
Config file conflict policy (default \fBkeep\fR). Same semantics as
on \fBinstall\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-arch " " \fIarch\fR
Allow additional architectures (e.g., \fB\-\-allow\-arch i686\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-sync
Wait for all post-install triggers to complete before returning.
.RE
.SS Package Information
.TP
.B q|query \fIpattern\fR
Search for packages by name or description. Aliases: \fBs\fR, \fBsearch\fR.
.TP
.B show \fIpackage\fR
Show detailed package information.
.TP
.B list \fR[\fIpattern\fR]
List packages. Use \fB\-\-installed\fR for installed packages only.
.TP
.B provides \fIpackage\fR
Show what capabilities a package provides.
.TP
.B whatprovides \fIcapability\fR
Find packages providing a capability.
.TP
.B find \fIpattern\fR
Find which package contains a file matching the pattern.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-installed
Search only in installed packages.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-available
Search only in available packages (requires files.xml sync).
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-limit " " \fIN\fR
Limit results to N matches.
.PP
By default, searches both installed and available packages.
Available package search requires enabling files.xml sync via
\fBurpm media set \-\-all \-\-sync-files\fR followed by
\fBurpm media update \-\-files\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B depends \fIpackage\fR
Show package dependencies.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-legend
Show symbol legend after tree display.
.RE
.TP
.B rdepends \fIpackage\fR
Show reverse dependencies.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-legend
Show symbol legend after tree display.
.RE
.TP
.B why \fIpackage\fR
Explain why a package is installed.
.TP
.B recommends \fIpackage\fR
Show packages recommended by \fIpackage\fR.
.TP
.B whatrecommends \fIpackage\fR
Show packages that recommend \fIpackage\fR.
.TP
.B suggests \fIpackage\fR
Show packages suggested by \fIpackage\fR.
.TP
.B whatsuggests \fIpackage\fR
Show packages that suggest \fIpackage\fR.
.SS Media and Server Management
.TP
.B media \fR[\fIsubcommand\fR]
Manage media sources. Without subcommand, lists media.
.RS
.TP
.B list
List configured media.
.TP
.B add \fIurl\fR " " \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Add a new media. For official Mageia URLs, name and short name are
auto-detected. For custom or third-party media, use
\fB\-\-custom \fIname\fR \fIshort_name\fR\fR.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-custom \fIname\fR \fIshort_name\fR
Add as custom media with display name and short identifier.
.TP
.B \-\-name \fIname\fR
Legacy mode for non-Mageia URLs without \fB\-\-custom\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-update
Mark as an update media.
.TP
.B \-\-disabled
Add but leave disabled.
.TP
.B \-\-import\-key
Import the GPG key advertised by the media.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-unsigned
Allow unsigned packages (custom media only).
.TP
.B \-\-version \fIver\fR
Target Mageia version for custom media (9, 10, cauldron, ...).
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
Non-interactive mode.
.RE
.TP
.B remove \fIname\fR
Remove a media.
.TP
.B enable \fIname\fR
Enable a media.
.TP
.B disable \fIname\fR
Disable a media.
.TP
.B update \fR[\fIname\fR]
Update media metadata (parallel).
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-files
Also sync files.xml for media with sync_files enabled. Required for
\fBurpm find\fR to search available packages.
.RE
.TP
.B import \fR[\fIfile\fR]
Import media configuration from urpmi (default file:
\fI/etc/urpmi/urpmi.cfg\fR). Use \fB\-\-replace\fR to overwrite media
with the same name and \fB\-\-auto\fR to skip prompts.
.TP
.B seed-info \fIname\fR
Show the computed seed set for a media: matching rpmsrate sections,
seed package count, expanded locale packages, dependency closure size
and rough disk-space estimate. Useful before flipping a media to
\fB\-\-replication=seed\fR.
.TP
.B link \fIname\fR \fI+server\fR|\fI-server\fR ...
Link or unlink servers to a media. Use +server to add, -server to remove.
Use +all/-all to add/remove all servers. Only links servers that have the media available.
.TP
.B set \fIname\fR \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Modify media settings.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-shared \fIyes\fR|\fIno\fR
Enable/disable sharing this media with peers.
.TP
.B \-\-replication \fIpolicy\fR
Replication policy: none, on_demand, seed.
.TP
.B \-\-seeds \fIsections\fR
rpmsrate sections for seed replication (comma-separated), e.g., INSTALL,CAT_PLASMA5,CAT_GNOME.
.TP
.B \-\-quota \fIsize\fR
Per-media quota (e.g., 5G, 500M).
.TP
.B \-\-retention \fIdays\fR
Days to keep cached packages.
.TP
.B \-\-priority \fIN\fR
Media priority (higher = preferred).
.TP
.B \-\-sync\-files
Enable automatic files.xml sync for this media. Required for \fBurpm find\fR
to search available packages.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-sync\-files
Disable automatic files.xml sync.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Apply setting to all enabled media (use with \fB\-\-sync\-files\fR or \fB\-\-no\-sync\-files\fR).
.RE
.TP
.B autoconfig \fB\-\-release\fR \fIversion\fR
Auto-add official Mageia media for a release. Aliases: \fBauto\fR, \fBac\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-release " " \fIversion\fR
Mageia release (e.g., 10, cauldron). Required.
.TP
.B \-\-arch \fIarch\fR
Target architecture (default: host).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be added without making changes.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-nonfree
Skip nonfree media.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-tainted
Skip tainted media.
.RE
.TP
.B discover \fIurl\fR
Discover all available media from a repository's \fBmedia.cfg\fR file.
Works with official mirrors, community repos (MLO), and corporate mirrors.
Existing servers hosting the same content are automatically linked
(verified by MD5 checksum of synthesis.hdlist.cz).
Aliases: \fBdisc\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be added without making changes.
.TP
.B \-\-with \fICATEGORIES\fR
Force-enable categories (comma-separated:
\fBnonfree\fR, \fBtainted\fR, \fB32bit\fR, \fBall\fR). Overrides the
default behaviour, which auto-enables a category only when it is
already installed (urpmi-style).
.TP
.B \-\-without \fICATEGORIES\fR
Force-disable categories (comma-separated).
.TP
.B \-\-sources
Include SRPMS media (excluded by default).
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Include debug media (excluded by default).
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B server \fR[\fIsubcommand\fR]
Manage download servers. Without subcommand, lists servers.
.RS
.TP
.B list
.RS
List configured servers.
.sp
.BR \-\-all
Lists all servers showing also those disabled
.RE
.TP
.B add \fIname\fR \fIurl\fR
Add a new server.
.TP
.B remove \fIname\fR [\fIname\fR ...]
Remove one or more servers.
.TP
.B enable \fIname\fR
Enable a server.
.TP
.B disable \fIname\fR
Disable a server.
.TP
.B priority \fIname\fR \fIN\fR
Set server priority (higher number = preferred, default 50).
.TP
.B test \fR[\fIname\fR]
Test connectivity to a server (or all enabled servers) and auto-detect the best
IP mode (auto/ipv4/ipv6/dual).
.TP
.B ip-mode \fIname\fR \fImode\fR
Force the IP version used when connecting to a server.
Valid modes: \fBauto\fR (system default), \fBipv4\fR, \fBipv6\fR, \fBdual\fR
(both work, prefer IPv4).
.TP
.B stats \fIname\fR
Show measured performance statistics for a server: download speed (EWMA of
past downloads), latency, success/failure counts, and last check time.
Statistics are updated automatically after each download and metadata sync.
.TP
.B autoconfig
Auto-discover and add the fastest servers from the Mageia mirror API.
Tests latency to all candidates and keeps the N best.
Saves measured latency so server ordering is meaningful from the first download.
.sp
Geographic filtering (country/continent whitelist or blacklist) is applied
from the
.B [server]
section in
.IR /etc/urpm/conf.d/10\-server.cfg .
Set
.B auto_add = false
to disable all automatic server addition.
.RE
.SS P2P and Cache
.TP
.B peer \fR[\fIsubcommand\fR]
Manage P2P peers. Without subcommand, lists peers.
.RS
.TP
.B list
List discovered peers and download statistics.
.TP
.B downloads \fR[\fIhost\fR]
List packages downloaded from peers, optionally filtered by host.
Use \fB\-\-limit\fR / \fB\-n\fR to cap the number of entries
(default: 50).
.TP
.B blacklist \fIhost\fR
Block a peer. Accepts \fB\-\-port\fR / \fB\-p\fR for a specific port
and \fB\-\-reason\fR / \fB\-r\fR to record a reason.
.TP
.B unblacklist \fIhost\fR
Unblock a peer (accepts \fB\-\-port\fR).
.TP
.B clean \fIhost\fR
Delete RPMs downloaded from a peer (use after blacklisting). The
\fIhost\fR argument is required. Accepts \fB\-\-yes\fR / \fB\-y\fR
to skip the prompt and \fB\-\-show\-all\fR / \fB\-a\fR to print
the full file list instead of truncating.
.RE
.TP
.B cache \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage the package cache.
.RS
.TP
.B info
Show cache statistics.
.TP
.B clean \fR[\fB\-n\fR] [\fB\-y\fR] [\fB\-v\fR]
Remove orphan RPMs from cache. \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR previews,
\fB\-\-auto\fR skips confirmation, \fB\-\-verbose\fR lists every file.
.TP
.B rebuild
Rebuild the package database from synthesis files.
.TP
.B rebuild-fts
Rebuild the FTS index used by \fBurpm find\fR for fast file search.
.TP
.B stats
Detailed cache statistics.
.RE
.TP
.B mirror \fR[\fIsubcommand\fR]
Manage local package mirroring (the daemon-side serving of cached
packages to LAN peers). Aliases: \fBproxy\fR.
.RS
.TP
.B status
Show mirror status, quotas and served versions.
.TP
.B enable
Start serving cached packages to peers.
.TP
.B disable
Stop serving packages.
.TP
.B quota \fR[\fISIZE\fR]
Show or set the global cache quota (e.g. \fB10G\fR, \fB500M\fR).
.TP
.B enable-version \fIversions\fR
Resume serving the listed Mageia versions to peers
(comma-separated, e.g. \fB10,cauldron\fR).
.TP
.B disable-version \fIversions\fR
Stop serving the listed Mageia versions to peers.
.TP
.B clean \fR[\fB\-n\fR]
Enforce quotas and retention policies.
\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR previews without deleting.
.TP
.B sync \fR[\fImedia\fR] [\fB\-\-latest-only\fR]
Force replication sync for media with \fBseed\fR replication policy.
\fB\-\-latest-only\fR keeps only the most recent version of each
package (smaller, DVD-like).
.TP
.B rate-limit \fR[\fIon\fR|\fIoff\fR|\fIN/min\fR]
Configure outbound rate limiting (or show current setting).
.RE
.SS History and Rollback
.TP
.B history \fR[\fIN\fR]
Show transaction history. Default: last 20 transactions.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-install
Show only install transactions.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-remove
Show only remove transactions.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-detail " " \fIID\fR
Show details of transaction \fIID\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-delete \fIID\fR ...
Delete transactions from the history log.
.RE
.TP
.B rollback \fIspec\fR
Rollback transactions. \fB\-\-auto\fR / \fB\-y\fR skips confirmation.
.RS
.TP
.B rollback 5
Rollback last 5 transactions.
.TP
.B rollback to 42
Rollback to transaction #42.
.TP
.B rollback to 26/11/2025
Rollback to a specific date.
.RE
.TP
.B undo \fR[\fIN\fR]
Undo last transaction, or transaction \fIN\fR. Records a clean
history entry. Use \fB\-\-auto\fR / \fB\-y\fR to skip the prompt.
.TP
.B progress \fR[\fB\-\-watch\fR]
Show the progress of a detached background transaction (e.g. one
launched via the daemon or PackageKit). Without arguments, prints
the current state and exits. With \fB\-\-watch\fR / \fB\-w\fR,
continuously watches until completion.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B config \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage urpm configuration.
.RS
.TP
.B blacklist \fR[\fIlist\fR|\fIadd\fR \fIpkg\fR|\fIremove\fR \fIpkg\fR]
Manage the blacklist of critical packages that must never be removed.
.TP
.B redlist \fR[\fIlist\fR|\fIadd\fR \fIpkg\fR|\fIremove\fR \fIpkg\fR]
Manage the redlist of packages that require explicit confirmation.
.TP
.B kernel-keep \fR[\fIN\fR]
Show or set how many old kernels to keep (in addition to the
running one).
.TP
.B version-mode \fR[\fIsystem\fR|\fIcauldron\fR|\fIauto\fR]
When both system and cauldron media are enabled, pick which one wins
for upgrades. \fIauto\fR removes the explicit preference.
.TP
.B gnome-auto-upgrades \fR[\fIyes\fR|\fIno\fR]
Allow or disallow GNOME Software to install upgrades autonomously.
.TP
.B discover-auto-upgrades \fR[\fIyes\fR|\fIno\fR]
Allow or disallow KDE Discover to install upgrades autonomously.
.TP
.B packagekit-auto-upgrades \fR[\fIyes\fR|\fIno\fR]
Allow or disallow the PackageKit offline-update path.
.TP
.B show
Show the effective configuration as merged from all
\fI/etc/urpm/conf.d/*.cfg\fR drop-ins.
.TP
.B edit \fR[\fIfile\fR]
Open the main \fIurpm.cfg\fR (or the named drop-in) in \fB$EDITOR\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B key \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage GPG keys for package verification.
.RS
.TP
.B list
List installed GPG keys.
.TP
.B import \fIkeyfile\fR
Import a GPG key from a local path or HTTPS URL.
.TP
.B remove \fIkeyid\fR
Remove a GPG key by its short ID (e.g.
.IR 80420f66 ).
.RE
.TP
.B mark \fIpackage\fR manual|auto
Mark packages as manually or automatically installed.
.TP
.B hold \fR[\fIpackage\fR ...] [\fB\-r\fR \fIreason\fR]
Hold packages to prevent upgrades and obsoletes replacement.
Without arguments, lists held packages.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reason " " \fIreason\fR
Record a reason for the hold.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List held packages.
.RE
.TP
.B unhold \fIpackage\fR ...
Remove hold from packages, allowing them to be upgraded or replaced.
.SS Initialization and Download
.TP
.B init \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Initialize a new urpm setup with standard Mageia media. Used for
bootstrapping fresh systems or chroots (typically combined with
\fB\-\-urpm\-root\fR).
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-release " " \fIversion\fR
Target Mageia version (e.g., 10, cauldron). Auto-detected from
\fB\-\-mirrorlist\fR or the host system if omitted.
.TP
.B \-\-mirrorlist " " \fIurl\fR
URL to fetch the mirror list from (auto-generated from
\fB\-\-release\fR if not provided).
.TP
.B \-\-arch " " \fIarch\fR
Target architecture (default: host).
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-auto
Non-interactive mode.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-sync
Configure media but skip the initial metadata sync.
.PP
The \fB\-\-urpm\-root\fR top-level option (see \fBOPTIONS\fR) selects
the chroot in which the configuration and packages are written.
.RE
.TP
.B cleanup
Unmount filesystems (\fI/dev\fR, \fI/proc\fR ...) previously mounted by
\fBurpm init\fR inside an \fB\-\-urpm\-root\fR chroot. Use after
finishing work in the chroot.
.TP
.B update \fR[\fImedia\fR]
Top-level shortcut for \fBurpm media update\fR: refreshes media
metadata only (apt-style). Same options as \fBmedia update\fR
(notably \fB\-\-files\fR).
.TP
.B cleandeps
Alias for \fBautoremove --faildeps\fR: remove orphan dependencies
left behind by interrupted transactions. Accepts \fB\-\-auto\fR /
\fB\-y\fR.
.TP
.B readme \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Display README messages recorded for transactions (Mageia
\fIREADME.urpmi\fR / \fIREADME.upgrade\fR style).
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-last
Show the README of the most recent transaction (default).
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-transaction " " \fIID\fR
Show the README of a specific transaction.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List transactions that have README messages.
.RE
.TP
.B appstream \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage AppStream metadata for software centers (KDE Discover, GNOME
Software).
.RS
.TP
.B generate \fR[\fB\-\-output\fR \fIfile\fR] [\fB\-\-no\-compress\fR] [\fB\-\-media\fR \fIname\fR]
Generate the AppStream catalog from the package database. Default
output is
.IR /var/cache/swcatalog/xml/mageia-{version}.xml.gz .
.TP
.B status
Show AppStream status for all media.
.TP
.B merge \fR[\fB\-\-refresh\fR]
Merge per-media AppStream files into the unified catalog;
\fB\-\-refresh\fR also refreshes the system AppStream cache.
.TP
.B init-distro \fR[\fB\-\-force\fR]
Create the OS metainfo file required by Discover and GNOME Software.
\fB\-\-force\fR overwrites an existing file.
.RE
.TP
.B genmedia \fIrpms_dir\fR
Generate media metadata (hdlist.cz, synthesis.hdlist.cz, files.xml.lzma,
info.xml.lzma, changelog.xml.lzma, MD5SUM) from a directory of RPM files.
This is the server-side counterpart of
.BR appstream :
where the latter consumes catalogs to populate client databases,
.B genmedia
produces the full set of metadata a Mageia mirror serves to its clients.
Packaged separately as
.IR urpm-ng-genmedia
to keep the base client install lean.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-incremental
Skip RPMs whose SHA-256 has not changed since the previous run (uses the
state cache in
.IR rpms_dir/.genhdlist/state.json ).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-hdlist
Skip the
.I hdlist.cz
output (faster when only the synthesis is needed).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-md5sum
Skip the
.I MD5SUM
file (handy for tests; clients reject media that lack it).
.TP
.B \-\-xml\-info
Force regeneration of the XML info files even when the corresponding
RPMs have not changed.
.TP
.B \-\-appstream\-info
Generate an AppStream catalog from the embedded
.I metainfo.xml
files, falling back to a minimal component derived from RPM header fields.
Packages whose content is entirely non-user-facing (devel headers, debug
symbols, static archives, pure runtime libraries) are filtered out rather
than emitted with a generic
.B System
category.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-empty\-media
Tolerate an empty input directory instead of aborting.
.TP
.B \-\-hdlist\-filter \fIFILTER\fR
Override the compression filter for
.IR hdlist.cz
(default:
.IR ".cz:gzip -9" ).
.TP
.B \-\-synthesis\-filter \fIFILTER\fR
Override the compression filter for
.IR synthesis.hdlist.cz
(default:
.IR ".cz:xz -7" ).
.TP
.B \-\-xml\-info\-filter \fIFILTER\fR
Override the compression filter for the XML info files (default:
.IR ".lzma:xz -7" ).
.RE
The
.I media_info/
output directory is locked while a generation runs so concurrent clients
always see a consistent snapshot.
.TP
.B download \fIpackage\fR ...
Download packages to cache without installing.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-release " " \fIversion\fR
Target release for cross-release downloads.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-buildrequires ", " \-\-builddeps ", " \-\-br " " \fI[spec]\fR
Download build dependencies from spec file.
.TP
.B \-\-only\-peers
Only download from LAN peers, no upstream mirrors.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-arch " " \fIarch\fR
Allow additional architectures (e.g., \fB\-\-allow\-arch i686\fR).
.RE
.SS Container Build System
.TP
.B image \fR[\fIsubcommand\fR]
Manage container images. Without subcommand, lists images.
Aliases: \fBimg\fR.
.RS
.TP
.B make \fB\-\-release\fR \fIversion\fR \fB\-\-tag\fR \fItag\fR [\fB\-\-profile\fR \fIname\fR]
Create a minimal Docker/Podman image for RPM builds.
Aliases: \fBm\fR.
The top-level command \fBmkimage\fR is a deprecated alias for \fBimage make\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-release " " \fIversion\fR
Mageia version (e.g., 10, cauldron).
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-tag " " \fItag\fR
Image tag (e.g., mageia:10-build).
.TP
.B \-\-profile " " \fIname\fR
Package profile (default: build). Available profiles: build (RPM build environment),
ci (CI/testing), minimal (minimal system with urpm). Profiles are loaded from
/usr/share/urpm/profiles/*.yaml and /etc/urpm/profiles/*.yaml.
.TP
.B \-\-arch " " \fIarch\fR
Target architecture (default: host).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-packages " " \fIlist\fR
Additional packages (comma-separated).
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-buildrequires " " \fIspec_or_srpm\fR
Pre-install BuildRequires from a .spec or .src.rpm file into the image.
.TP
.B \-\-runtime " " docker|podman
Container runtime (default: auto-detect).
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-chroot
Keep temporary chroot after image creation.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-workdir " " \fIpath\fR
Working directory for chroot (default: /tmp).
.RE
.TP
.B update \fItag\fR [\fB\-\-runtime\fR \fIruntime\fR]
Update an existing image in-place (sync media and upgrade packages).
Aliases: \fBu\fR.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-runtime " " docker|podman
Container runtime (default: auto-detect).
.RE
.TP
.B list \fR[\fB\-\-runtime\fR \fIruntime\fR]
List container images.
Aliases: \fBl\fR, \fBls\fR.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-runtime " " docker|podman
Container runtime (default: auto-detect).
.RE
.TP
.B delete \fItags\fR ... [\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fB\-\-runtime\fR \fIruntime\fR]
Delete one or more container images.
Aliases: \fBd\fR, \fBrm\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Force deletion without confirmation.
.TP
.B \-\-runtime " " docker|podman
Container runtime (default: auto-detect).
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B build \fB\-\-image\fR \fItag\fR \fIsource\fR ...
Build RPM packages in isolated containers. Media metadata and installed packages
inside the container are automatically updated before building.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-image " " \fItag\fR
Docker/Podman image to use.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIdir\fR
Output directory for SRPM builds (default: ./build-output).
For .spec files, results go to workspace/RPMS/ and workspace/SRPMS/.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-with\-rpms " " \fIpattern\fR
Pre-install local RPMs in container before build. Useful when building
a package that depends on a library you just built locally. Supports glob
patterns and can be repeated. Example: \fB-w 'RPMS/x86_64/libfoo*.rpm'\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-update
Skip media sync and package update before building.
.TP
.B \-\-runtime " " docker|podman
Container runtime (default: auto-detect).
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-parallel " " \fIN\fR
Number of parallel builds (default: 1).
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-container
Keep container after build (for debugging).
.TP
.BR \-\-subrel " " \fItag\fR
Tag this build with a sub\-release marker so output RPMs become
\fINAME\-VERSION\-RELEASE.TAG.DIST.ARCH.rpm\fR. Useful for
distinguishing third\-party builds (e.g. \fBmlo\fR) from the official
ones in bugzilla and on package lists. Injected as \fB%subrel\fR into
the container build environment and picked up automatically by Mageia
specs that use \fB%mkrel\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-rpmmacros " " \fIfile\fR
Inject \fIfile\fR as \fB/root/.rpmmacros\fR inside the build container.
Useful to override \fB%packager\fR, \fB%vendor\fR, \fB%dist\fR or any
other rpm macro without touching the spec. When combined with
\fB\-\-subrel\fR, the \fB%subrel\fR line is appended last so it takes
precedence over anything the file may define.
.PP
Sources can be .src.rpm files or .spec files. For .spec files, sources are
automatically copied from the SOURCES/ directory (supports workspace/SPECS/
and workspace/SOURCES/ layouts).
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/urpm/
Database and cache directory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/urpm/packages.db
SQLite database for package metadata and history.
.TP
.I /var/lib/urpm/medias/
Downloaded packages cache.
.TP
.I /etc/urpm/urpm.cfg
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/urpm/conf.d/*.cfg
Drop-in configuration overrides (loaded alphabetically after urpm.cfg).
The
.B [server]
section in
.I 10\-server.cfg
controls automatic mirror addition and geographic filtering
(country_blacklist, country_whitelist, continent_blacklist, continent_whitelist, auto_add).
.TP
.I /etc/bash_completion.d/urpm
Bash completion script.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Install a package:
.B urpm i firefox
.TP
Search for packages:
.B urpm q video player
.TP
Update all packages:
.B urpm u
.TP
Remove a package without asking for confirmation :
.B urpm e \-y gimp
.TP
Show why a package is installed:
.B urpm why libpng
.TP
Update media metadata:
.B urpm m u
.SH PARTIAL TRANSACTIONS
.B urpm upgrade
runs in best-effort mode by default: packages whose dependencies cannot be
satisfied are dropped from the transaction and listed at the end of the
run with their reason (missing dependency, version mismatch, SRPM sibling
cascade, etc.). Pass
.B --atomic
to switch to strict mode (recommended on servers): any unsolvable
package aborts the whole transaction.
.PP
.B urpm install
is atomic by default: if any requested package cannot be installed, the
entire transaction is rolled back. Pass
.B --no-atomic
to opt into best-effort mode for the install path.
.PP
A
.B --prefer
preference is treated as a unit: if its companion request cannot be
satisfied, the whole hint group is dropped together with an explicit
warning. The preference is never silently reverted on its own.
.PP
SRPM siblings (packages built from the same source) are dropped as a
group: skipping
.I kwin
will also drop
.I kwin-common
and
.I lib64kwin5
to prevent ABI mismatches at runtime.
.PP
Reverse-dependency packages held back silently by the solver (for
example, a package whose new version requires a sibling that was just
dropped) are surfaced explicitly with their unsatisfied requirement,
not hidden.
.PP
Use
.B --show-all
(or
.BR -a )
to print the full per-package reason (every classified broken
.B Requires
and every cascade hop). Without it, each entry is capped at the
first 3 lines.
.PP
To retry the dropped operations later, run
.B urpm upgrade <package>
or
.B urpm install <package>
on the affected names once the upstream packaging issue is fixed.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Transaction completed successfully, no package skipped.
.TP
.B 1
Hard failure: transaction aborted (atomic mode, network error,
permission error, etc.).
.TP
.B 2
Partial transaction: completed successfully, but at least one package
was dropped. The skipped packages are listed on stderr with their
reason. Scriptable check:
.BR "[ $? -eq 2 ]" .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR urpmd (8),
.BR rpm (8),
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/pvi-github/urpm-ng/issues
.SH AUTHORS
Pascal Vilarem (Maât) and contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024-2025 Pascal Vilarem (Maât).
Licensed under GPLv3+.
